---
id: Objective 1.2 Security Fundamentals
aliases: []
tags: []
---
	
## Confidentiality
Refers to protection of information from unauthorized access.

#### Confidentiality Purposes 

**Protecting personal privacy**: Protecting employees from having their personal data accessible without their consent

**Maintaining a business advantage**: Protecting a business's proprietary data to be able to maintain a competitive
advantage in the industry

**Achieving regulatory compliance**: Organizations are required to maintain a level of confidentiality for sensitive
data in their position including personally identifiable information (PII),
protected health information (PHI), and various types of financial data

#### Confidentiality Security

**Encryption**: The process of converting data into cipher text to prevent unauthorized access

**Access Controls**: Ensures only authorized personnel can access certain types
of data

**Data Masking**: a method that involves obscuring data within a database to
make it inaccessible for unauthorized users while retaining the real data's
authenticity and use for authorized users

**Physical Security measures**: Used to ensure confidentiality for physical
types of data and for digital information contained on servers and workstations

**Training and awareness**: Conducting regular training on the security
awareness best practices that employees can use to protect the organizations
sensitive data

## Integrity 
**Integrity** ensures information and data remiains accurate and unchanged from
their original state unless intetionally modified by authorized individuals. It
verifies the accuracy and trustworthoness of the data of its entire lifecycle

#### Integrity Purposes

**Ensure Data Accuracy**: Maintining data integrity ensures that decisions are
made based on correct information and with the expected outcomes

**Maintain Trust**: If users can't trust the data they are recieving they can't
be expected to trust your applications, systems, or networks

**Ensure System Operability**: If data is corrupted the system are likely to
malfuction which can lead to unexpected behaviours and excessive system
downtimes.

#### Integrity Security

##### **Hashing** 

The process of converting data into a fixed size value. Even if a
small amount of data is changed, the hash will change drastically which can
indicate that something has happened to the data. A ***Hash Digest*** or 
***Digital Fingerprint*** is a fixed-size string or value generated by a hashing 
algorithm. By comparing the hash of received data with a previously generated 
hash digest, one can determine if the data has been altered or corrupted.
Example hash functions include SHA-256 (Secure Hash Algorithm 256-bit) and MD5
(Message Digest Algorithm 5), although MD5 is considered less secure due to 
vulnerabilities.

###### Hashing Steps

1. Before creating a digital signature, the data (message, document, or file) that needs 
   to be signed is processed through a cryptographic hash function.

2. A hash function takes an input (the data) of any size and produces a fixed-size output, 
   known as a hash value or hash digest. 

Properties of a hash function include producing a unique hash for each unique input, 
being deterministic (same input always yields the same output), and being computationally 
efficient.

##### **Digital Signatures**

A cryptographic technique used to provide authenticity, 
integrity, and non-repudiation for digital documents or messages. Digital signatures 
work in conjunction with hashing to ensure the authenticity, integrity, and 
non-repudiation of digital data.

###### Digital Signing Steps 

1. After the data is hashed to produce a hash digest, the digital signing
   process begins with the sender (signer) using their private key to encrypt
   the hash digest.

2. The recipient (verifier) of the digitally signed data uses the corresponding 
   public key of the signer to decrypt the digital signature. 

Once decrypted, the verifier obtains the original hash digest of the data. If the computed 
hash digest matches the decrypted hash digest (which was originally signed), it confirms 
the integrity and authenticity of the data.

##### **Checksums**

A method to verify the integrity of data during transmission. By
checking the sender checksum of the trasmitted data with the recievers 
calculated checksum for the recieved data to determine if any unintended changes
in the data have occured. Often used in situations where a full cryptographic hash
function might be overkill due to computational resources or time constraints

###### Checksum Steps

1. The checksum value is generated by a checksum algorithm and appened to the
   data itself (data + checksum)

2. When the data is accessed or recieved the checksum is recalculated using the
   same algorithm. If the recalculated checksum matches the transmitted
   checksum, the data has likely not been altered

While checksums can detect errors, they are not foolproof against deliberate 
tampering because they are not designed with cryptographic security in mind.

##### **Access Controls** 
Access controls ensures that only authorized users can modify data which reduces
that risk of unintetional or malicious alterations

##### **Regular Audits**
Regular audits is the practice of reviewing company logs and operations to
ensure that only authorized changes have been made and any discrepancies are
addressed

## Availability 
**Availibility** ensures that information, systems, and resources are available
and operational when needed by authorized users

#### Nines of Availability 

"Nines of availability" refers to the measure of system uptime, reliability, 
or availability. It's a way of quantifying how much time a system or service 
is expected to be operational and available for use over a given period, 
usually a year. Each "nine" represents a higher level of availability and uptime:

| Nines | Availability | Downtime |
|:-----|:-------------|:---------|
| 1 | 90% | 36.5 days per year | 
| 2 | 99% | 3.65 days per year |
| 3 | 99.9% | 8.76 hours per year | 
| 4 | 99.99% | 52.56 minutes per year |
| 5 | 99.999% | 5.26 minutes per year |
| 6 | 99.9999% | 31.5 seconds per year |

**5 Nines** is the golden standard for service providers

#### Availability Purposes 

**Ensuring Business Continuity**: If a critical systems is not operational, the
business can face significant losses

**Maintaining Customer Trust**: If a system is down for to long and customers 
are unable to access acounts or use your service. it can encourage
customers to seek elsewere to get there needs met

**Upholding Organizations Reputation**:  If your org has repeated downtime
events this will tarnish your companies reputation as a reliable providers

#### Availability Solutions

##### Redundancy 
Duplication of critical components or functions of a system with the intetion of
enhancing its reliability. In essence having backups incase of a system failure
that can handle the requests while the main system is down such as:

**Server Redundancy**: using multiple servers in a load balance so that if one
is overloaded or fails, the other servers can take over

**Data Redundancy**: storing multiple copies of data in multiple places so that
it can be accessed from multiple locations (RAIDS, Backups, etc...)

**Network Redundancy**: if one network path fails the data can still travel
through another route

**Power Redundancy**: using backup power sources to ensure systems remain
operational in power outages

## Non-repudiation
**Non-repudiation** is focused on providing undeniable proof in digital
transactions and ensures that participants cannot deny their participations
or the authenticity of their actions

**Digital Signatures**: signing a hash digest using a users private asymmetric 
encryption key that ensures data is coming from a specified source and hasn't
been altered during transmission

#### Non-repudiation Purposes 

**Confirming authenticity of digital transactions**: impersenation on the
internet is easy so we need as system to be able to verify the identity of a
user to perform a specific action

**Ensure integrity of critical communications**: all parties invloved can ensure
that the transmission hasn't been tampered with

**Provide accountability in digital processes**: ensures accountability of users
since there actions can be traced back to them via there digital signatures
without denial

## Authentication
**Authentication**: a security measure that ensures individuals or entities are
who they say they claim to be during a communication or transaction, verifying
the identity of participants in a digital interaction.

#### Authentication Methods

**Something you know**: (Knowledge Factor) relies on information that a user can
recall. Passwords, Security Questions, etc..

**Something you have**: (Possession Factor) relies on the user presenting a
physical item to authenticate themselves. Badge, SMS Authenticator,
etc..

**Something you are**: (Inherence Factor) relies on the user providing a unique
physical or behavioral characteristic of the person to validate that they are
who they claim to be. Facial Recognition, Figerprint Reader, Other Biometric
Data

**Something you do**: (Action Factor) relies on the user conducting a unique
action to prove who thery are. Handwritting Samples, etc..

**Somewhere you are**: (Location Factor) relies on the user being in a certain
geographic location before access is granted. Geolocation, Geofencing, etc..

#### Multi Factor Authentication Systems 
A security process that requires multiple authentication methods for a user to 
verify their identity, increasing authentication security and
decreasing risk of unauthorized access to data and systems.

- **TFA**: Two-Factor Authentication
- **MFA**: Multi-Factor Authentication (Two or more methods)

## Authorization 
**Authorization** is the permissions and privileges granted to users or entities
after they have been authenticated. It is a set of rules and polies based on
user roles and attributes used to dictate what actions users can perform.

## Accounting
**Accounting** is a security measure that ensures all user activities are
properly tracked and recorded. Logging and monitoring user interaction

#### Accounting Purposes 

**Audit Trail**: Provides a chronological record of all user activities that can
be used to trace changes, unauthorized access, or anomalies back to a specific
user or point in time 

**Regulatory Compliance**: Maintains a comprehensive record of all users'
activities

**Forensic Analysis**: Users detailed accounting and event logs that can help
cybersecurity experts understand what happened, how it happened, and how to
prevent similar incidents from occurring again in the future

**Resource Optimization**: Orgs can optimize system performance and minimize
costs by tracking resource utilization and allocation decisions

**User Accountability**: Thorough accounting system ensures users' actions are
monitored and logged, deterring potential misuse and promoting adherence to the
organization's policies

#### Accounting Tools

**Syslog servers**: Used to aggregate logs from various network devices and
systems so that admins can analyze them to detect patterns or anomalies

**Network analysis**: Used to capture and analyze network traffic to gain
detailed insights into all data moving within a network (wireshark)

**SIEMs**: Security Information and Event Management, provides real-time
analysis of security alerts generated by various hard and software infra, in an
org.

## Review Questions

#Q 
What is a SIEM?
?
a Security Information and Event Management that provides real-time analysis of
security alerts

#Q 
What are the five authentication methods?
?
- Action Factor (Something you do) - Handwritting, Walking
- Location Factor (Somewhere you are) - Geolocation 
- Inherence Factor (Something you are) - Biometrics
- Possession Factor (Something you have) - Badges
- Knowledge Factor (Something you know) - Passwords

## Gap Analysis 
**Gap Analysis** is the proccess of evaluating the diifferences between an orgs
current performance and its desired performance.

#### Gap Analysis Steps 

**Define the scope**: Identifiying the areas of the org that will be evaluated
and the desiired outcome of that analysis 

**Gather data on current state**: Surveys, interviews, or other forms of data
collection 

**Identify gaps**: once data has been gathered it is analyzed to identify any
areas that the orgs current performance falls short of its desired performance 

**Develop a plan to bridge gaps**: Once performance is analyzed make changes to
proccesses and other areas to help meet the performance or security of the orgs
desired state

#Q 
What is non-repudiation?
?
it povides undeniable proof in digital transactions and ensures participants
cannot deny their participation or authenticity of their actions via use of
there digital signatures

#Q 
What is redundancy?
?
Duplication of critical components or functions of a system with the intetion of
enhancing its reliability and availability.

#Q 
What is data availability?
?
ensures that information, systems, and resources are available
and operational when needed by authorized users


#Q 
What are access controls?
?
Access controls ensure only authorized users can modify data

#Q 
What is a Regular Audit?
?
Practice of reviewing logs and operations to ensure that only authorized changes
are being made to data

#Q 
What is a checksum?
?
A less intensive way to ensure data integrity. A checksum is generated and 
appended to data (data + checksum). The reciever can then recalculate the
checksum to verify data integrity

#Q 
What is a digital signature?
?
A cryptographic technique used for digital documents or messages. Digital
signatures use a asymmetric encryption key algorithm to encrypt (sign) hash values 

#Q 
What is hashing and what is it for?
?
The process of converting data into a fixed size value whose value is sensitive
to data changes. This allows us to verify data integrity by matching hash
digests

#Q 
What are the fice main integrity security practices?
?
Hashing, Digital Signatures, Checksums, Access Controls, and Regular audits

#Q 
What is data integrity?
?
**Integrity** ensures information and data remiains accurate and unchanged from
their original state unless intetionally modified by authorized individuals.

#Q  #AOSR/7qo33
What is the difference between **Information Security** and **Information System
Security**? 
? #AOSR/7qo33/m/1uk4
**Information Security** is protecting data and information while **Information
System Security** is protecting the systems that hold the data

#Q  #AOSR/134vj
What is AAA?
? #AOSR/134vj/m/61rl
AAA - Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting refers to the process of
verifying the identity of a user or system, defining what actions or resources
they have access to, and tracking their activities and resource usage

#Q #AOSR/2kc1b
What are Security Controls?
? #AOSR/2kc1b/m/6j7q
mechanisms put in place to mitigate risks and protect information systems and
data

#Q #AOSR/2307h
What are the 4 security control categories?
? #AOSR/2307h/m/4h56
Technical, Managerial, Operational, and Physical

#Q #AOSR/c406d
What are the 6 security control types?
? #AOSR/c406d/m/2mkd
Preventative, Deterrent, Detective, Corrective,  Compensating, and Directive

#Q #AOSR/3vukg
What is a vulnerability?
? #AOSR/3vukg/m/7da3
any weakness in a system/implementation that can be exploited

#Q
What is a threat?
any potential danger that can exploit a vulnerability

#Q 
What is Confidentiality?
?
The protection of information from unauthorized access

#Q 
What are the 3 purposes of confidentiality?
?
Protecting personal privacy, maintaining a business advantage, and achieving
regulatory compliance

#Q 
What are the 5 security practices for that assist in achieving confidentiality?
?
Encryption, access controls, data masking, physical security measures, training
and awareness
